Israel is blamed for blocking Aid
deliveries to Gaza an accusation the
government denies So What mechanisms are
in place for Israel to ensure food and
humanitarian assistance reaches the
millions of people the UN says are at
risk of starvation this is Inside
[Music]
Story
hello and welcome to the program I'm
Muhammad jamj before Israel's war most
of the 2.3 million Palestinians living
in Gaza were already dependent on
humanitarian assistance after 4 and a
half months of a total Siege compounded
by an intense bombing campaign the
situation is dire access to Aid has been
a major aspect of the conflict Israel
first blocking it then maintaining tight
control over deliveries and now it's
accusing un agencies of failing faing to
distribute it all while its forces
attack the strip from the air ground and
sea so how does humanitarian Aid enter
Gaza Dimitri medeno explains the
humanitarian assistance for Gaza goes
through a lengthy logistical process
before it reaches the millions of
Palestinians who so desperately need it
step one it needs to get to the Border
Gaza is a narrow strip of land on the
Mediterranean bordering Egypt and Israel
hundreds of trucks wait for hours and
sometimes days at these checkpoints Nana
and Karam Abu salm step two after
Israeli inspections all United Nations
deliveries are sent through the Karam
abalam Crossing while non-un Aid is
currently being roted to Egypt and
enters via the Rafa
Crossing step three the supplies are
offloaded on the Gaza side of the Border
collected by humanitarian agencies
sorted and then distributed across the
strip
there are hurdles at each
stage at the borders Israeli protesters
have been trying to delay deliveries
despite the government designating The
Crossings as a military
zone the security inspections are
conducted by Kat the coordination of
government activities in the territories
a unit of the Israeli defense department
it decides what is allowed into Gaza and
what's banned the same unit is
responsible for overseeing Israeli
policies in the occupied West
Bank International Aid agencies have
increasingly warned of famine in Gaza
accusing Israel of blocking the entry of
food and much needed supplies but the
head of Kat unit has refuted the
accusations saying this the problem lies
with the international organization
processing and receiving the aid there
is no food shortage in
Gaza yet families are eating animal feed
and parents are skipping meals to ensure
their children have something to eat and
the un's food agency a Lifeline to
millions of Palestinians has suspended
its operations and convoys have come
under
Fire despite coordinating their roots
with the Israeli military Demitri medeno
Al jazer for Inside
[Music]
Story all right let's go ahead and bring
in our guests joining us from London is
Andreas cre an associate professor of
security studies at King's College
London he specializes in security and
strategy in the Middle East in occupied
East Jerusalem is Sarah Davies
spokesperson for the international
Committee of the Red Cross in Israel and
the occupied territories the icrc has
operated in the region since
1967 and in Oslo Raymond Johansson is
the Secretary General of Norwegian
people's Aid which has provided
humanitarian assistance in the Gaza
Strip for more than 35 years he's also a
former Norwegian state Secretary for
foreign affairs a warm welcome to you
all and thanks so much for joining us
today on inside story Sarah let me start
with you today could you explain to our
viewers just how the icrc is involved in
the ongoing efforts to get more Aid into
Gaza for example what exactly does the
icrc um do as far as speaking with
specific bodies negotiating with
specific Israeli government bodies and
what kind of access are you
getting thank you so much for having me
on so firstly I think it's it's very
important just to clarify that as the
international Committee of the Red Cross
we are not
negotiating as such but we do of course
engage with parties to the conflict as
well as other actors other institutions
other states um and really anyone who
has influence over this this situation
we are heavily focused on our
humanitarian diplomacy which does
include speaking directly to the parties
to this conflict including of course
Israel and Hamas um and reminding them
of first and foremost their obligation
under International humanitarian La for
Israel as the occupying power in Gaza in
the occupied Palestinian territory they
have the the obligation to ensure that
civilians have access to Necessities
things like food and and safe drinking
water as well as shelter uh these are
all part of our ongoing discussions with
them um and the relationships that we'
built having been here for so many
decades Sarah obviously the icrc has a
very long history of difficult
negotiations with Waring parties around
the world this is according to these
long-held principles of the organization
how does this compare what we're seeing
in Gaza the kinds of discussions that
you're having right now when it comes to
humanitarian diplomacy how much more
difficult is it compared to other
conflicts in the past so yeah as you
said we have worked in in many different
conflicts all over the world I think
every conflict has its own challenges
uh but this particular conflict as we
have all seen uh has had a very intense
few months of hostilities and this has
severely impacted the people the
civilians on the ground in Gaza who you
know are not part of this height uh we
have seen as well in this day and age
the the very fast spread of information
uh on social media which unfortunately
can have an impact on uh States and and
authorities and other organizations um
knowledge of the situation uh and
unfortunately does have an impact at
times on our operations on the ground as
I said we have longstanding
relationships with uh both Hamas and
Israel as the parties to this conflict
and why I can't go into the the content
of that discussion as as a dis a discret
organization as that mutal organization
that we are we are regularly in contact
with them uh consistently discussing all
different aspects of this conflict of
this conflict our concerns what we're
seeing on the ground and and we will
continue to do so Raymond What
mechanisms are in place for Israel to
ensure food and humanitarian assistance
reaches the millions of people that the
UN say are at risk of starvation in Gaza
first of all I think it's uh important
to say that the over staff in Gaza they
are as from other organization displac
themselves and most of our people are
from Gaza City and
uh but for the time being the resources
is very limited they are doing the best
to set setting up some latrines and uh
for women and children and uh at the
same time we find that the aid workers
are subject to direct attack and so are
also the Health institution the
humanitarian sites and so it's
extremely difficult for the time being
to do any humanitarian
assistance and uh as the representatives
from the Israeli government said that
there are no food sortage in Gaza that's
of course free fantasy it is food
shortage in Gaza and even
before the 7th of October 80% of the
population in Gaza was dependent on Aid
and now with the blockades and just the
Rafa Crossing and a k Shalom Crossing
operate with a minimum capacity with a
lot of restriction it sets itself the
bombing must stop and it we have to open
up for more sight
to bring in humanitarian assistance and
it's
extremely difficult situation for the
people who lives on a very very small
area which is different from other
conflict this is small small area with
two millions people in the biggest
prisons prison in the world so it's uh
it's important to take that into account
as well Raymond let me follow up with
you about another point the Palestinian
red crescent is warning that that a
number of people in Gaza have died as a
result of Israel's deliberate starvation
and famine in Gaza is is what we are
seeing now from your perspective is it
War by starvation and and are Israel's
actions causing Famine of course that's
the consequence of the the bombing
that's the consequence of the lack of
access for humanitarian uh assistance
and we saw also the northern part of
gasa is no basic basically an IDF
military zones so it means that it's
also difficult or almost impossible to
to go back to see if there's possible to
find to harvest some food to find some
food The Fishery it's impossible so
totally depend on humanitarian
assistance Andreas we heard in Dimitri's
report earlier uh uh he was talking
about a body known as Kat uh that's
short for the coordination of government
activities in the territories it's a
unit of the is defense department I want
to ask you more specifically what is Kat
and how does it
work right I mean Kat sounds civilian
but as you already said is a unit in the
ministry of Defense it's run by the
military it's run by a military officer
it's staffed by Military Officers and
it's an exe execu executive body of the
IDF to actually Implement occupation so
we have to understand that obviously
occupation was supposed to be phased out
after Oslo it didn't happen so this was
sort of an interim body to facilitate
the military the civilian side of the
military occupation but Kat responds and
answers to the military uh it's part
it's it's answering to a military body
and the Central Command it implements
military strategy so it's not a civilian
body um and as such also we see that is
obviously responsible for all the choke
points for all the flows of data of
people of Aid uh of goods Financial
Services anything that goes in and out
of the occupied territories that
includes the West Bank and Gaza and as
such it's in many ways when it comes to
Gaza the the prison gatekeeper because
it kind of keeps the gates and controls
the most important choke choke points
for Aid uh for people for capital for
any sort of flows going in and out of
Gaza and whatever goes through the
rougher Crossing which they now control
increasingly as well uh is ALS is is is
usually not controlled by Kat but is is
is punished when it goes through there
so they're trying to implement they've
tried to create a situation where they
control flows of people in particular
there as well but it's absolutely a
pivotal point and an ele a crucial
element of military occupation and the
fact that they control everything that
goes to uh the AR Crossing as well as K
Shalom and the South they cons and and
enforcing is that's very important
enforcing forcing the blockade means
that they're very much uh uh not just
complicit but they're a crucial part of
that blockade they're crucial in
controlling that territory and that
makes the IDF and the military and the
ministry of Defense as well are very
much a a a party that occupies the Gaza
Strip even if they don't control their
daytoday operations on the ground you
should maybe in a in a in terms of
illustrating that I would say that Kat
is a many ways the national government
while what Hamas is doing domestically
is more like a municipality government
because they're completely tied and
controlled by what Kat is doing in terms
of information flows flows of people and
flows of money and goods so Andreas if
you can follow this train of thought a
little bit further Israel is being
blamed by many Aid agencies for blocking
Aid deliveries to Gaza of course the
Israeli government denies those
accusations but then you also have Kat
officials with Kat who are saying
essentially that the problem doesn't lie
with them that the problem lies with
International organizations uh and they
say that International organizations
need to do more to ensure the flow of
Aid into Gaza how do you make sense of
these statements from Kat leadership
saying that the
could do more to get Aid in essentially
pushing blame onto the UN or other NOS
or Aid agencies while while as you're
saying they're actually the ones in
control no I this is obviously a part of
that information campaign it's a way of
deflecting responsibility away from Kat
Kat has been on a on a massive
information campaign in the United
States with some of their senior members
uh going around speaking to people and
saying look we're doing everything that
we can but it's not our fault uh in
reality considering that they are The
Gatekeepers the prison Gatekeepers of
Gaza in many ways they do control what's
going on and it's it's part of that
information campaign that we've seen in
Western capitals run by Israeli
information networks to kind of blame
the UN and un agencies of saying they're
insufficient they're undermined by Hamas
they're they're they're complicit in
whatever is going on whatever happened
on the 7th of of October uh and so
that's part of that information campaign
and Kat is part is integrated into that
overall strategy but kogut isn't a
strategic so it's still because it
reports to the military it's not a
civilian institution that is next to the
military it is answering to the same
military strategy and as Raymond said
already before military or humanitarian
Aid has become weaponized it had become
a tool of statecraft a tool of Warfare
by the Israelis and kek therefore has
become part of that same military
strategy of uh attacking not just Hamas
and the Hamas infrastructure but also
the civilians that live in Gaza and and
as such Kat is very much complicit in
that uh and I would see any of these
kind of information campaigns as part of
a wider effort to discredit
International International Community
and the especially Nos and the
humanitarian Community Raymond I saw you
nodding along to a lot of what Andreas
was saying there it like you wanted to
jump in please go ahead yeah I just want
to to drop in and uh I think it's fair
also to to mention the catastrophic
impact of freezing of funds to unra unra
was responsible for all the
infrastructure for receiving
humanitarian assist into Gaza and now we
see the freezing funds uh that unra it's
not able to do their work they have also
been very instrumental to the rest of
the humanitarian family because they had
the infrastructure so uh no 20 countries
or or so uh still are freezing the funds
so this is very very dramatic and that's
also uh the part of the ongoing PR
campaign that everyone who has been in
involved in Gaza from the humanitarian
side if it's Ang if it's un they to
blame and indirectly say that they are
supporting groups that we are not
supporting because we are doing the
humanitarian assistance and we're trying
to build up and strengthen the Civil
Democratic Society which is also the
prerequisite for trying to find a more
peaceful solution first we also have to
strengthen that because it will not be
sustainable if you are just flushing in
a lot of Aid without any control and we
know that in Gaza these days the Law and
Order of course it's almost impossible
to to Prevail so uh we need access at
the same time to see that we are
partners that doing over bus to trying
to save lives in extreme critical
situation for the population in gos
these days Sarah before October 7th you
had around 500 trucks of Aid that would
enter Gaza daily and and even then most
of the population depended on
humanitarian assistance of course things
have grown much more dire and the drop
off it's been precipitous when it comes
to the number of trucks that go in
everyone knows not enough relief is
getting into Gaza what are the
priorities right now and why isn't it
getting to the people who need it that
definitely is is not enough uh entry of
Aid into Gaza right now for us at the
international Committee of the cross one
of the the main priorities is Medical
Care medical supplies and medical
equipment right now there is I would say
no functioning health system in Gaza and
there are increasing concerns and
increasing rates uh of things like
infectious diseases on top of those who
have been wounded and require ongoing
care ongoing dressing changes you know
people already lived with chronic
diseases and disabilities before the 7th
of October before this escalation began
there are still people who require their
regular medication things like uh
dialysis and and cancer treatment
chemotherapy uh that has now been uh had
immense pressure added to it because
there are so many thousands of people
who have been severely wounded who are
exposed to the elements uh in Gaza right
now living in tents uh in a very small
area in in about 20% of the entirety of
the Gaza Strip and this is really just a
a hot bed uh of of public health
concerns I think there are many
challenges and many reasons why
suppliers are not reaching people the
first is that there is such a a vast
array of needs you know individual
people individual families have
different needs and to even be able to
to go through that and try and address
each need uh is is a challenge in and of
itself there are of course the security
concerns um our team has been impacted
by by security uh incidents our team was
fortunately in November fired upon I
know other humanitarian organizations
have have had similar incidents uh and
the logistics there are no passable
roads in Gaza or very few passable roads
they're lited with rubble there are the
uh concerns of unexploded ordinances
fighting in this that people are are not
able to tell uh where it is and of
course there is very little access to
those civilians who are still uh in the
north Sarah let me also ask you you're
talking about you know the logistics and
how difficult it is and and on that note
there are reports now that the UK and
Canada have started to airdrop supplies
to Northern Gaza because they say it's
impossible to get Aid in there from your
perspective is that a sustainable or
efficient way of delivering Aid and and
is it really impossible to the extent
that that's the only way that Aid could
get in so air drops are something that
we at the icrc have used in the past in
in different conflicts around the world
um and we're we're very uh pleased of
course that this means that some in the
north will receive uh the medical
supplies that I believe were dropped but
drops air drops do come with their own
you know set of challenges um apart from
the logis sticks things like that there
needs to be uh large areas that are not
filled with people uh that do not have
objects in the way um it is it is a very
expensive and so therefore I'm unsure
how sustainable that would be for for
multiple uh attempts um you know there's
always the the small uh potential that
things break on impact it really depends
on what's in these airdrops is it is it
medical equipment that's very sensitive
is it supplies is it bags of rice or
flour uh they are their own challenges
with air drops uh on the on the
impossibility of gaining access to the
north I don't know if I would call it
impossible in a general sense but safely
absolutely not right now it's very
complex very challenging for any
organizations to to go to the north uh
or return from the north this is as I
said there there's all those Logistics
like the the rubble the unexploded
ordinances but it is an active conflict
Zone still there are still fighting
ongoing there are still you know
missiles and Rockets flying back and
forth there is at times hand toand
combat fighting in different areas
telecommunications is a huge challenge
for teams to be able to even even
communicate uh their Pathways where they
are that's a that's a really big
challenge um for anyone who is
attempting to to gain access to the
right now Andreas I want to explore a
bit more about Kat because this is a
complicated issue and there is a lot of
confusion about how exactly Aid gets in
uh we were talking earlier about Kat
being a body within the defense Ministry
you were saying as part of the military
structure from your perspective would
things be at all easier if something
like Kat were shifted under a civilian
controlled structure or would that
perhaps complicate things further maybe
even politicize the matter further now
in a normal country in a normal liberal
democracy I would say yes this sort of
agency should be civilian control
shouldn't be run by the military uh when
you look at um you know the the what
happened in our counter Insurgency
operations in Iraq and Afghanistan
executed by Western countries we kind of
try to shift governance back to a
civilian body fairly swiftly um the
problem in Israel is obviously and there
has been quite a lot of debate in in
recent months to kind of shift Kat away
from the ministry of Defense to uh no no
less no one uh less than the Minister of
Finance schmage who himself is obviously
a settler he's a convicted uh is a
convicted uh offender as well in that
space and obviously is highly
politicized has a has a huge interest in
making sure that Kat is actually no
longer cooperating and as we are
criticizing Kat quite rightly for what
it said does as a gatekeeper to let Aid
into Gaza it things would be far worse
if Kat was not controlled by the
military but would actually be
controlled by a highly politicized uh
Ministry such as the Ministry of Finance
which would respond to a radical like
schmage who in his own views would love
to uh continue with ethnic cleansing uh
kind of create a situation where Garin
would no longer be able and allowed to
live in the Gaza Strip and would
instrumentalize Kat for exactly that
same reason hence why the military has
been pushing back Raymond um there is
confusion when it comes to reporting how
much Aid is actually getting into Gaza
there seem to be a lot of discrepancies
in the numbers that have been posted and
reported by different bodies how
difficult is it to actually decipher how
many Aid trucks are getting into Gaza
these days earlier in the discussions
today we heard that usually before the
7th of October it was 500 trucks each
day now it's some days it's snow tracks
some other day it's up to 20 maybe 100
and then down to zero the day after so
the overall perspective it's that there
is a limit of humanitarian ass
assistance is almost nothing so I think
it's a saying in
war the first victim is the truth and
this is also the truth in this war we're
trying to say that well it's not that
serious it's not the blockade it's still
uh as we heard in the earlier discussion
today there are no food sortage in Gaza
of course what is the consequences
30,000 has been killed they have been
killed since 7th of October 80% depend
on that that so it's
limitation it's difficulties but we know
that it's coming Raymond some yes
Raymond I'm I'm sorry to interrupt you
we just have about a minute and a half
left I also want to ask you about the
fact that when it comes to the concern
about being able to operate in Gaza and
distribute Aid we heard in the last
couple of days that the world food
program is going to be halting Aid
deliveries in the northern part of Gaza
how much concern is there about that
right now and and do you believe that
perhaps even Norwegian people's Aid will
have to Halt distribution of Aid in the
north of Gaza because of security
concerns too going forward yeah that's
true we hope that it will we need some
more International humanitarian workers
into gasa we think that also for
security reason it will be good we have
heard news about that birdfood program
that they have in pipeline food for two
two months more to go uh which is
possible but but still access is the
main problem now we have to see that
both AAS Crossing near Gaza City must be
open Carney Crossing can be open and at
the same time we have Rafa Crossing and
K Shalom Crossing which is necessary
because it's limited access for the
people who lives in gasa to move from
north to south and east to west so we
need to have more more access
all right well we have run out of time
so we're going to have to leave the
conversation there thanks so much to all
of our guests andreasg Sarah Davies and
Raymond
Johansson and thank you too for watching
you can see the program again anytime by
visiting our website al.com and for
further discussion go to our Facebook
page that's
facebook.com AJ insidestory you can also
join the conversation on X our handle is
at AJ insid story from me Muhammad jamj
and the whole team here bye for now